# 1.1.4 Compound Functions

We have identified in JavaScript some of the elements that must appear in any powerful programming language:

- Numbers and arithmetic operations are primitive data and functions.
- Nesting of combinations provides a means of combining operations.
- Constant declarations that associate names with values provide a limited means of abstraction.

Now we will learn about function declarations, a much more powerful abstraction technique by which a compound operation can be given a name and then referred to as a unit.

We begin by examining how to express the idea of "squaring." We might say, "To square something, take it times itself." This is expressed in our language as
```js
function square(x) {
  return x * x
}
```
We can understand this in the following way:
```txt
function square(    x   ) { return x    *     x; }
//  ^       ^       ^         ^    ^    ^     ^
// To    square something,  take   it times itself.
```

We have here a compound function, which has been given the name square. The function represents the operation of multiplying something by itself. The thing to be multiplied is given a local name, x, which plays the same role that a pronoun plays in natural language. Evaluating the declaration creates this compound function and associates it with the name square.[^1]

The simplest form of a function declaration is

```js
function name(parameters) { return expression }
```

The name is a symbol to be associated with the function definition in the environment.[^2] The parameters are the names used within the body of the function to refer to the corresponding arguments of the function. The parameters are grouped within parentheses and separated by commas, as they will be in an application of the function being declared. In the simplest form, the body of a function declaration is a single return statement,[^3] which consists of the keyword `return` followed by the return expression that will yield the value of the function application, when the parameters are replaced by the actual arguments to which the function is applied. Like constant declarations and expression statements, return statements end with a semicolon.

Having declared `square`, we can now use it in a function application expression, which we turn into a statement using a semicolon:
```js
square(21)
// 441
```
Function applications are—after operator combinations—the second kind of combination of expressions into larger expressions that we encounter. The general form of a function application is

```txt
function-expression(argument-expression)
```
where the `function-expression` of the application specifies the function to be applied to the comma-separated `argument-expressions`. To evaluate a function application, the interpreter follows a procedure quite similar to the procedure for operator combinations described in section [1.1.3](./1.1.3.md).

- To evaluate a function application, do the following:
  1. Evaluate the subexpressions of the application, namely the function expression and the argument expressions.
  2. Apply the function that is the value of the function expression to the values of the argument expressions.

```js
square(2+5)
// 49
```
Here, the argument expression is itself a compound expression, the operator combination `2 + 5`.

```js
square(square(3))
// 81
```
Of course function application expressions can also serve as argument expressions.
We can also use square as a building block in defining other functions. For example, $x^2+y^2$ can be expressed as
`square(x) + square(y)`

We can easily declare a function sum_of_squares[^4] that, given any two numbers as arguments, produces the sum of their squares:

```js
function sum_of_squares(x, y) {
  return square(x) + square(y);
}
```
```js
sum_of_squares(3,4)
// 25
```
Now we can use sum_of_squares as a building block in constructing further function:
```js
function f(a) {
  return sum_of_squares(a + 1, a * 2);
}
```
```js
f(5)
// 136
```

In addition to compound functions, any JavaScript environment provides primitive functions that are built into the interpreter or loaded from libraries. Besides the primitive functions provided by the operators, the JavaScript environment used in this book includes additional primitive functions such as the function `math_log`, which computes the natural logarithm of its argument.[^5] These additional primitive functions are used in exactly the same way as compound functions; evaluating the application `math_log(1)` results in the number 0. Indeed, one could not tell by looking at the definition of `sum_of_squares` given above whether `square` was built into the interpreter, loaded from a library, or defined as a compound function.



[^1]: Observe that there are two different operations being combined here: we are creating the function, and we are giving it the name `square`. It is possible, indeed important, to be able to separate these two notions—to create functions without naming them, and to give names to functions that have already been created. We will see how to do this in section 1.3.2.

[^2]: Throughout this book, we will describe the general syntax of expressions by using italic symbols—e.g., name—to denote the "slots" in the expression to be filled in when such an expression is actually used.

[^3]: More generally, the body of the function can be a sequence of statements. In this case, the interpreter evaluates each statement in the sequence in turn until a return statement determines the value of the function application.

[^4]: The way multi-part names such as `sum_of_squares` are written affects the readability of programs, and programming communities differ on this. According to the common JavaScript convention, called camel case, the name would be `sumOfSquares`. The convention used in this book is called snake case, and was chosen for its closer resemblance to the convention used in the Scheme version of this book, where hyphens play the role of our underscores.

[^5]: Our JavaScript environment includes all functions and constants of ECMAScript's [Math object](https://www.ecma-international.org/ecma-262/9.0/index.html#sec-math-object), under the names `math_...`. For example, ECMAScript's `Math.log` is available as `math_log`. The MIT Press web page for this book includes the JavaScript package `sicp` that provides these and all other JavaScript functions that are considered primitive in the book.

